## Community Midwifery Postnatal Care Service
Home care is a new service provided to you after delivery and discharge from the hospital. This new kind of care for postnatal women is called the 'Community  Midwifery Postnatal Care Service'. We are providing you with this information so that you are informed and can understand what the new service is all about.

### What Is the Community  Midwifery Postnatal Care Service?

This is a new service that will support you and your baby during early days after delivery. The midwife who visits you at home will provide you and baby, with clinical care to promote the physical and psychological health and wellbeing for you and your baby.

- Information and education relating to the normal changes associated with childbirth.
- Breastfeeding education and support.
- Providing information to you in order to recognise signs of illness in yourself and your babies and where to access help.
- Promote long term physical and emotional wellbeing.
- Support you and your family to build the confidence to manage the care of your baby.

### Why is the Community  Midwifery Postnatal Care Service being offered?

This service has been introduced into Qatar:

- To provide care and support at a level determined in partnership with you.
- To ensure the health and wellbeing of both a mother and her baby after the birth is maintained.

### What happens once you are discharged from hospital?

Before you are discharged from the ward, your doctor will determine if you will need a home visit follow-up. The Postnatal Unit Nurse/Midwife will take your

- Home address.
- Telephone/ Mobile Number.

A member of the community midwifery team will call you to arrange a suitable time to visit you.

### Who will visit you?

#### Community Team:

The midwife that will visit you is a health care professional, specialized in women's health and the health of newborns along with a multidisciplinary team when needed.

#### Schedule of visits:

An appointment follow-up will be arranged for you as follows:

- First face to face visit between 3-5 days after C- Section.
- Second Postnatal contact face to face or Telephone consultation between 7th day to 14th day Postpartim.

Most women will receive two Postnatal contact (face to face visit and Telephone call) depending on the day of discharge from hospital. A third visit can be arranged if Clinically indicated.

### Post-natal visits - What to expect:

During each visit, your midwife will carry out a range of procedures to monitor and assess you and your baby's development. These include:

#### For the mother:

A full examination : general well-being:

- Breast check, uterus,post caesarean wound, perineum, legs, bowels, voiding (bladder), blood pressure /pulse/temperature and dietary intake.
- Calf muscle examination - assess for swelling and tenderness.
- Emotional assessment - discuss any worries /low mood or concerns you might have.
- Provide support on breastfeeding issues and successful exclusive breastfeeding.
- Advise you on healthy eating/ physical activity and mobilization/ pelvic floor  exercises and personal hygiene.

#### For the Baby:

A well-baby check including :

1. Weighing your baby.
2. General condition of the baby:- Vital signs, color of the skin.
3. Feeding pattern &amp; cues.
4. Sleeping pattern and settling techniques.
5. Elimination (bowel and bladder).
6. Safety Issues.
7. Post circumcision care.
8. Immunization.
9. Follow up visits.
