### Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


### Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


ISBN 978-92-4-005714-2 (electronic version)
ISBN 978-92-4-005715-9 (print version)


**© World Health Organization 2022**


Some rights reserved. This work is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 IGO licence (CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO;
[https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo).](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo)


Under the terms of this licence, you may copy, redistribute and adapt the work for non-commercial purposes, provided the work is appropriately cited, as
indicated below. In any use of this work, there should be no suggestion that WHO endorses any specific organization, products or services. The use of the
WHO logo is not permitted. If you adapt the work, then you must license your work under the same or equivalent Creative Commons licence. If you create a
translation of this work, you should add the following disclaimer along with the suggested citation: “This translation was not created by the World Health
Organization (WHO). WHO is not responsible for the content or accuracy of this translation. The original English edition shall be the binding and authentic
edition”.


Any mediation relating to disputes arising under the licence shall be conducted in accordance with the mediation rules of the World Intellectual Property
[Organization (http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules/).](http://www.wipo.int/amc/en/mediation/rules/)


**Suggested citation.** Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022.
Licence: [CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO.](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/igo/)


**Cataloguing-in-Publication (CIP) data.** CIP data are available at [http://apps.who.int/iris.](http://apps.who.int/iris/)


**Sales, rights and licensing.** To purchase WHO publications, see [http://apps.who.int/bookorders. To submit requests for commercial use and queries on](http://apps.who.int/bookorders)
rights and licensing, see [https://www.who.int/copyright.](https://www.who.int/copyright)


**Third-party materials.** If you wish to reuse material from this work that is attributed to a third party, such as tables, figures or images, it is your
responsibility to determine whether permission is needed for that reuse and to obtain permission from the copyright holder. The risk of claims resulting from
infringement of any third-party-owned component in the work rests solely with the user.


**General disclaimers.** The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion
whatsoever on the part of WHO concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its
frontiers or boundaries. Dotted and dashed lines on maps represent approximate border lines for which there may not yet be full agreement.


The mention of specific companies or of certain manufacturers’ products does not imply that they are endorsed or recommended by WHO in preference to
others of a similar nature that are not mentioned. Errors and omissions excepted, the names of proprietary products are distinguished by initial capital letters.


All reasonable precautions have been taken by WHO to verify the information contained in this publication. However, the published material is being
distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with the reader. In
no event shall WHO be liable for damages arising from its use.


Design and layout by L’IV Com Sàrl


#### Contents

**Acknowledgements** .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **iv**


**Acronyms** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **vi**


**1 Introduction** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **1**

1.1 Who is this guide for?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Purpose. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.3 Use of the guide.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3


**2**
**Perinatal mental health** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **5**

2.1 Frequency of perinatal mental health conditions.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.2 Consequences **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.3 Common symptoms **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2.4 Social determinants and other risk factors **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.5 Protective factors **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.6 Availability of care **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9


**3 Provision of care** .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **11**

3.1 Stepped care.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3.2 Supportive environments.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.3 Promotion and prevention.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
3.4 Treatment.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17


**4 Integration of programmes** .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **21**

4.1 Planning **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
4.2 Preparing for implementation **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27


**5 Provision of care for specific needs** .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **33**

5.1 History of mental health problems.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
5.2 Substance use.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.3 Self-harm or thoughts of suicide.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
5.4 Disability and physical illness. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.5 HIV/AIDS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
5.6 Adolescent pregnancy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.7 Unintended pregnancy and termination.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
5.8 Infant loss. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.9 Premature birth, infant ill-health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
5.10 Difficulty in bonding. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.11 Domestic and gender-based violence **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
5.12 Poverty.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.13 Humanitarian settings **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
5.14 Pandemics .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
5.15 Social isolation **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42


**6 Monitoring and evaluation** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **43**


**References** .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **47**


Annex 1. **Sample terms of reference for a working team** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **53**


Annex 2. **Sample template for a budget** .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **54**


Annex 3. **Examples of indicators for monitoring and evaluation** **.** . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . **55**



iii


#### Acknowledgements

Vision and conceptualization

The document was developed under the overall guidance and conceptualization of Devora Kestel and Tarun Dua,
World Health Organization (WHO) Department of Mental Health and Substance Use.


Project coordination and editing

The project was coordinated by Neerja Chowdhary, WHO Department of Mental Health and Substance Use and
Florence Baingana, WHO Regional Office for Africa, and written by Tatiana Taylor Salisbury, King’s College London,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland; Katherine Atmore, King’s College London, United Kingdom;
Simone Honikman, University of Cape Town, South Africa; Jane Fisher, Monash University, Australia; Sally Field,
University of Cape Town, South Africa; and Rachael Glaser, University of Cape Town, South Africa.


WHO contributors and reviewers

**Headquarters:**
A team comprising staff members and consultants provided technical guidance and support for the project. They
were: Oyeteyo Akala, Mercedes Bonet Semenas, Doris Chou, Bernadette Daelmans, Batool Fatima, Lamia Jouini,
Hernan Julio Montenegro Von Mühlenbrock, Allisyn Carol Moran, Olufemi Taiwo Olapado, Anayda Gerarda Portela,
Lale Say and Chiara Servili.


**Regional and country offices:**
Collaborators in WHO regional and country offices who reviewed the document and provided valuable feedback
were: Chencho Dorji, Regional Office for South-East Asia; Momodou Gassama, WHO Country Office for Gambia; Ledia
Lazeri, Regional Office for Europe; Renato Oliveira e Souza, Regional Office for the Americas; Khalid Saeed, Regional
Office for the Eastern Mediterranean; and Martin Vandendyck, Regional Office for the Western Pacific.


WHO gratefully acknowledges the contributions of participants at a workshop in The Gambia: Lamarana Bah, Samba
Bah, Omar Barrow, Omar Bojang, Bakary Camara, Fatou Camara, Bubacarr Ceesay, Arfang D. Faye, Lamin Darbo,
Balkisu Garber, Omar Gassama, John J. Mendy, Kalilu Jagne, Foday Jallow, Foday Jawla, Abdou K. Jallow, Saffiatou
Kinteh, Momodou L. Darboe, Alfusainy Manneh, Musa Marena, Mustapha S. Minteh, Gibril Sanneh, Fatou Sanyang,
Bakary Sonko, Alieu Sowe and Yankuba Suwareh.


External contributors and reviewers

Valuable inputs were received from external reviewers and contributors: Najia Atif, Human Development Research
Foundation, Pakistan; Sarah Bar-Zeev, United Nations Population Fund; Judy Bass, Johns Hopkins University, United
States of America (USA); Prabha Chandra, National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences, India; Matthew
Frey, PATH, USA; Jerome Galea, University of South Florida, USA; Charlotte Hanlon, King’s College London, United
Kingdom; Zainab Hijazi, UNICEF; Louise Howard, Kings College London, United Kingdom; Guitele J. Rahill, University
of South Florida, USA; Marko Kerac, Centre for Maternal, Adolescent Reproductive and Child Health, United Kingdom;
Marian Knight, Oxford University, United Kingdom; Rebecca Levine, USAID, USA; Manasi Kumar, University of Nairobi,
Kenya; Emma McKinney, University of Cape Town, South Africa; Laura Murray, Johns Hopkins University, USA; Ana
Nieto, UNICEF; Inge Peterson, University of KwaZulu Natal, South Africa; Atif Rahman, University of Liverpool,
United Kingdom; Katie Rose M Sanfilippo, University of London, United Kingdom; Shekhar Saxena, Harvard T. H.
Chan School of Public Health, USA; Siham Sikander, Human Development Research Foundation, Pakistan; Halyna
Skipalska, HealthRight, USA; Prasansa Subba, Transcultural Psychosocial Organization, Nepal; Katherine Sorsdahl,
University of Cape Town, South Africa; Robert Stewart, University of Malawi, Malawi; Ezra Susser, Columbia University,
USA; Graham Thornicroft, King’s College London, United Kingdom; Wietse Tol, Johns Hopkins University, USA; Mark
Tomlinson, Stellenbosch University, South Africa; Thach Tran, Monash University, Australia; Nawaraj Upadhaya,
HealthRight, USA; Ruth Verhey, Friendship bench, Zimbabwe; Shamsa Zafar, Air University, Pakistan; Willibald Zeck,
United Nations Population Fund.


Financial support

We are grateful for financial support from the Bernard van Leer Foundation and the Australian High Commission in
South Africa through their Direct Aid Programme.



iv


#### Acronyms

**CBT** cognitive behavioural therapy

**GBV** gender-based violence

**LHW** lady health worker

**M&E** monitoring and evaluation

**mhGAP** Mental Health Gap Action Programme

**MCH** maternal and child health

**NGO** non-governmental organization

**PMH** perinatal mental health

**WHO** World Health Organization



v


#### Introduction


#### 1. Introduction

Many women experience changes in their mental health during the perinatal

period. Poor mental health can negatively affect women’s health and the
well-being of their babies and families. Equally, poor health or difficult
circumstances in the lives of women, their babies and families can negatively
impact women’s mental health. Maternal and child health (MCH) services
during the perinatal period provide a unique opportunity for service
providers to connect with women and provide support.





This guide was written to provide information about how staff in MCH services can provide mental health promotion,
prevention, treatment and care. Supporting good mental health can improve health outcomes, and the quality
of MCH services for all women can be improved by creating an environment where they feel safe to discuss any
difficulties they are experiencing in a respectful and caring environment that is free from stigmatization. This may
increase attendance and result in better engagement in care for women and their babies.


Most women require low-intensity mental health support that can be provided in MCH services. For example, they
may be given information about the management of stress and use of support from friends and family. Some women
may experience mental health difficulties over a longer period, and they will require additional support either in
MCH services or by specialized mental health care providers through referral, when possible.


This guide will help to identify ways of supporting the women who use MCH services. The guide can be adapted to
individual levels of resources, funding, and service providers, in addition to local culture, procedures and policies.


1.1 Who is this guide for?


The guide was written primarily for programme managers, health service



administrators and policy-makers responsible for planning and managing
services for women and infants during the perinatal period who wish to
integrate mental health care into MCH services or strengthen existing service
provision. They include clinical managers and health service administrators
at hospitals, district and primary health facilities and in nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) and community-based organizations that provide
MCH services. It will also be a useful resource for health-care providers and
allied health professionals.


1.2 Purpose


The guide is intended to be used to develop and sustain high-quality,

integrated mental health services for women during the perinatal period. It
brings together the best available evidence to support MCH providers in
promoting good mental health, identifying symptoms of mental health
problems and responding in a way that is adapted to their context. The guide
lists the steps required to plan for integration of perinatal mental health
(PMH) care and for assessing its impact. It does not include support or
guidance on the provision of mental health interventions, which will be
addressed in separate resources for specific contexts, such as training
materials and job aids.







2


1.3 Use of the guide


The guide has the following sections:


# 2

**PERINATAL**
**MENTAL HEALTH**
_**What it is and why**_

_**it is important**_



**OF CARE**
_**Promotion,**_
_**prevention and**_
_**treatment of PMH**_


# 3


# 4


# 6



**PROVISION**


# 5

**PROVISION**
**OF CARE FOR**
**SPECIFIC NEEDS**

_**Provision of**_
_**tailored, inclusive**_
_**care to vulnerable**_

_**groups**_



**AND**
**EVALUATION**
_**Ways to ensure**_
_**that PMH services**_



**MONITORING**



**INTEGRATION OF**

**PROGRAMMES**
_**Planning effective**_



_**integration of**_
_**PMH care into**_



_**MCH services**_



_**are effective**_



_**conditions in**_
_**MCH services**_



The guide was designed to expand on previously published guidance on integration of mental health care into healthcare settings. Although it provides specific information for MCH services, it is designed to be used in conjunction
with the World Health Organization (WHO) resources on promotion, prevention and treatment of mental health
conditions:


**Title and description** **Reference no.**















1. Introduction 3


#### Perinatal mental health


#### 2. Perinatal mental health

































6


Everyone has the right to good mental health and appropriate treatment. All women should benefit from health care
that is respectful and free from abuse. Mental health is often understood as a spectrum, ranging from good mental
health to day-to-day struggles and more severe mental health and psychosocial conditions (Fig. 1).


**Fig. 1. Spectrum of mental health conditions and related requirements for care**











2.1 Frequency of perinatal mental health conditions


Pregnancy, birth and early parenthood may be stressful because they may change women’s identity, physical health
and economic situation. Perinatal anxiety and depression in the perinatal period are common, affecting an estimated
1 in 10 women in high-income countries _(7, 8)_ and one in five in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), indicating
the importance of support for PMH globally _(9, 10)_ .


Women who already have mental health problems may find that their symptoms worsen during the perinatal period.
Others may experience poor mental health for the first time during this period.


2.2 Consequences


Worsening of a woman’s mental health during the perinatal period may affect her well-being and that of her
infant and family. Poor mental health is associated with higher risks of obstetric complications (e.g., pre-eclampsia,
haemorrhage, premature delivery and stillbirth) and suicide _(11, 12)_ . In addition, women may be less likely to attend
antenatal and postnatal appointments _(13)_ . A woman’s untreated mental health condition may lead to a poor birth
outcome, such as low infant weight, and greater risks for physical illnesses and emotional and behavioural difficulties
in childhood _(11, 14)_ . Infants may also be at increased risk of difficulty in feeding and in bonding with their parents _(13)_ .


2.3 Common symptoms


Poor mental health during the perinatal period may present in many ways. (See mhGAP Intervention guide _(2)_ ).
The symptoms may be general:

feeling sad, crying easily or more than usual
finding no pleasure in experiences or activities that were once enjoyed
lacking energy or motivation
worrying or “thinking too much”


2. Perinatal mental health 7


sleeping more or less
eating more or less
reduced concentration
difficulty in making decisions
feelings of guilt or hopelessness
feeling worthless
thinking that something bad is about to happen or that the future is hopeless
thoughts of self-harm or suicide
non-specific body aches and pains and other physical symptoms
feeling troubled by memories or dreams about bad experiences


Some symptoms may be more specific:

unable to stop worrying about the baby
feeling unable or unwilling to care for the baby
negative thoughts about the baby


In severe cases, women may experience hallucinations or psychosis,



suicidal thoughts or severe depression. Women with these symptoms
require more intensive interventions from service providers.


Distinguishing everyday worries from clinically significant mental
health conditions may be difficult, particularly during the perinatal
period. A woman should be asked about how severe the symptoms
are, how long they have been present and the extent to which they
affect her ability to function in her daily life.





2.4 Social determinants and other risk factors


Some women may be at greater risk of poor mental health during the perinatal period because of external
circumstances or other health conditions _(15)_ (Fig. 2). Services should be aware of circumstances that indicate that
a woman needs more intensive mental health interventions. Such circumstances are explored in detail in the WHO
publications Social determinants of mental health guide _(16)_ and Maternal mental health and child health and
development in low- and middle-income countries report _(17)_ .


**Fig. 2. Examples of risk factors for poor perinatal mental health**





Poverty



pregnancy



Difficult birth



experiences



opportunities conditions



support and other conflicts



support





opportunities





Unwanted
pregnancy



Fertility difficulties Substance use



8 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


2.5 Protective factors


Mental health is not merely the absence of mental health
conditions but a state of wellness in which individuals can realize
their potential, cope with everyday stress and contribute to
their community. Certain factors may help people to protect
and promote mental health in the perinatal period (Fig. 3). See
WHO Mental health: Strengthening our response _(18)_ for more
information.


**Fig. 3. Examples of protective factors against poor perinatal mental health**





**Strong social**



**Opportunities for**
**generating income**



essentials



**Positive childbirth**



**experiences**
Feeling informed
and able to make



**High-quality**
**MCH services**

Empathetic,
competent healthcare providers who

treat women with
respect and dignity



**support**
Presence of caring
family, friends and



**Educational**
**opportunities**

Possibility of
attending and



completing



Ability to pay for



decisions



community



schooling



2.6 Availability of care


Although mental health conditions are common, most women do not receive the care they need _(14)_ . Some reasons
why women with mental health conditions are not identified and treated are lack of mental health specialists,
particularly in LMICs, and little training in mental health of other health-care providers. When health-care providers in
MCH services are trained to identify symptoms of mental health conditions and to deliver appropriate interventions
during routine contacts during the perinatal period, they can address the treatment gap in PMH care and improve
mental and physical health outcomes for women and their children.


Routine screening and general psychosocial support from MCH providers are appropriate for all women in the
perinatal period, ensuring that they feel able to discuss and manage their mental health struggles. More intensive
or specialized treatment is appropriate for women with longer-term, more severe mental illnesses. This is called the
“stepped-care approach” (see Section 3).


Additional information is provided in several WHO publications:


**Title and description** **Reference no.**









2. Perinatal mental health 9


#### Provision of care


#### 3. Provision of care



























12


This section reviews evidence-based interventions that can be included in a package for integration of PMH into
MCH services. A situation analysis will be useful for developing a feasible package of interventions that is based on
the needs of women attending MCH services during the perinatal period. All interventions should be adapted to
the context and culture of the setting in which they will be provided.


3.1 Stepped care


A stepped-care approach results in the most efficient use of MCH service providers and resources for the provision of
mental health care (Fig. 4) _(19)_ . This method of delivery ensures provision of less resource-intensive evidence-based
interventions to the majority of people. Interventions that require increasing resources are provided to those with
greater mental health care needs. The package of PMH care in a stepped-care approach includes interventions for
mental health promotion and prevention of mental health conditions during the perinatal period, identification of
mental health conditions and treatment. Treatment may be provided either in MCH services or elsewhere by referral.


**Fig. 4. A stepped-care approach to perinatal mental health**













**Step 1: Promotion of good mental health**

      - Provide respectful, non-stigmatizing care.

     - Promote PMH interventions for all women.

     - Identify women experiencing mental health
symptoms and women at greater risk of mental
health conditions (e.g., adolescents, sex workers,
women living with HIV, women experiencing
violence)









3. Provision of care 13


3.2 Supportive environments


The effectiveness of PMH care depends on creation of a safe, non-judgemental service in which women feels
respected and listened to. In such an environment, women may be more open to talking about their mental health
and using available services.


Stigmatization

Stigmatization is projection of negative stereotypes of people because of certain characteristics, which can lead
to their rejection and poor treatment. People with mental health conditions are stigmatized in many cultures _(22)_ .
Women with PMH conditions may be perceived as bad or unfit parents. As a result of stigmatization, women may be
unwilling to disclose their mental health problems or to access services _(23)_ . Integration of PMH into MCH services and
engagement on mental health at every contact with health services will help to normalize mental health conditions
and reduce stigmatization.


Respectful care

Respectful maternity care ensures women’s rights to privacy, dignity, autonomy, their beliefs and their preferences.
It can be ensured by training and working with MCH service providers to identify, understand and address barriers
to respectful care and identifying and celebrating good practices. Promotion of respect and dignity should be at
the centre of mental health service provision. Respectful care promotes good mental health for all and does not
require resources. Respectful care includes keeping women’s details private from anyone not involved in her care
and delivering all procedures with consent. During a consultation, people share personal information and trust
providers to use the information to help them. Without trust, people are less likely to seek help when they need it.


Abuse and disrespect of women by health-care providers have been reported in maternity settings throughout the
world. This can include _(24)_ :

physical abuse (e.g., hitting, slapping, shoving, punching)
verbal abuse (e.g., shouting, swearing or name-calling)
non-consensual care
undignified care
discrimination
abandonment or neglect
detention (e.g., keeping a woman in hospital until fees are paid)
non-confidential care


Services are responsible for ensuring that such behaviour is not permitted and that mechanisms to bring perpetrators
to account are in place. Women should be made aware of their right to respectful care and feel empowered to report
maltreatment by service providers anonymously.


3.3 Promotion and prevention


Both promotion and prevention of mental health conditions can reduce physical and psychological distress and
maintain human and financial resources for individuals, families, the health system and beyond _(25)_ .


Promotion of mental health includes supporting people in developing their personal skills or coping strategies and
strengthening those they already have (e.g., protective factors). Promotion also includes creating environments to
support mental well-being. These include social policies and strategies for creating employment, prevention and
reduction of violence, supporting the education of women and girls and anti-discrimination initiatives _(26)_ . Promotion
of mental health during the perinatal period can support women’s activities as community members, caregivers
and workers and help strengthen their resources (e.g., income, social connections, assets) and mental well-being.


Prevention builds awareness of the symptoms of mental health conditions and early warning signs to ensure
early intervention. The aim is to stop the development or worsening of symptoms associated with mental health
conditions _(27)_ .


14 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


MCH services can play a vital role in both promotion and prevention of mental health for women during the perinatal
period, as women have many contacts with these services. Promotion and prevention can also be delivered in
the community by informal support services, which may be part of the care pathway. Most types of MCH service
providers can be trained and supported to promote and prevent PMH conditions, including midwives, community
health workers and peers. MCH providers can deliver mental health promotion and prevention interventions as a
part of waiting-room talks, community outreach and perinatal and child health campaigns.


Psychoeducation

Psychoeducation involves sharing information about mental health conditions and ways to support mental wellbeing _(28)_ . It empowers women to recognize symptoms and seek help if necessary. It also provides women with
the skills to counter psychological harm, including healthy assertiveness, understanding their right to be treated
respectfully in all spheres of their life and that gender-based restrictions are harmful. It includes addressing
stigmatization, including the belief that women with mental health difficulties are “lazy” or “bad” parents or partners.
Information is also shared about self-care and coping strategies, available treatment options, their benefits and
possible side-effects.


If permission is granted by a woman, psychoeducation can and should include her partner and close family.
Psychoeducation for family members should include information on supporting a woman during the perinatal period.


Stress management

High levels of stress or constantly living in stressful conditions can affect physical and mental health. People
naturally develop ways to deal with stress; however, some people may not realize when these strategies are helpful
(e.g., speaking with a trusted friend, spending a quiet time in nature or in meditation or prayer, creative activities,
exercise) and when they are unhelpful (e.g., using alcohol or drugs). Mindfulness practice, relaxation and breathing
exercises can be helpful. WHO has published manuals on two stress management interventions that are delivered
by a provider (Problem Management Plus, PM+ _(29)_ ) or as guided self-help (Self-Help Plus, SH+ _(30)_ ).


In the perinatal period, stress management exercises can easily be integrated into support groups, parenting clubs
or antenatal classes if these are available and facilitators are trained to deliver them. WHO’s stress management
publication, Doing what matters in times of stress _(31)_, which is part of the SH+ programme, can also be useful to
women for stress management.


Strengthening social support

Social support may be emotional support (e.g., sharing one’s problems or feelings, experiencing kindness and respect
from others) or practical support from friends, family or community members (e.g., child care, providing meals).


Women experiencing mental health difficulties may find it difficult to use social support. They may feel too tired,
unworthy or afraid that the support will not be useful or given. This may cause further isolation which can worsen their
mental health. MCH service providers can play an important role in assisting women in identifying and connecting
with people around them to whom they can turn for support. Antenatal or parenting classes can also function as
peer support groups.





3. Provision of care 15


Promotion of functioning and life skills

Women with PMH conditions may struggle in their daily lives to care for themselves and their infants. Services can
provide a number of activities to help women with these tasks, such as teaching or supporting the development of
life skills (e.g., income-generating, parenting, problem-solving and communication skills, emotion management,
assertiveness) and involvement in social activities (e.g., supporting other people in need, participating in community
projects, faith-based activities, self-care).


Recognizing mental health conditions

The recognition or detection of mental health conditions is a vital aspect of PMH care. They may, however, be difficult
to recognize. Women may be ashamed or hesitant to speak about their difficulties because of the stigmatization
of mental health conditions. They may also feel that their symptoms are normal, attributable to a physical health
condition or cannot be helped. MCH providers may lack confidence in asking women about mental health difficulties,
be uncertain about what support is available or may be worried that it will take too much time and energy to deal
with such difficulties. As part of usual care, MCH providers should ask about a woman’s well-being, stressors in their
lives and any depressive symptoms.


Using screening tools

Mental health screening involves asking women a series of standardised



questions to identify whether they are likely to be experiencing a mental
health condition. Screening can be administered by a trained community
health worker, midwife, auxiliary nurse or other MCH service provider.
Women who are literate can complete a screening tool herself. Any
screening tool used should be adapted to the local context and culture
and reflect the realities of women in the perinatal period. Screening
should be done only when a mental health care pathway exists to assist
women who may have a mental health condition.





A positive screening result is not a clinical diagnosis: it indicates a high chance that a woman is experiencing a mental
health condition. When possible, women with a positive result should receive a diagnostic evaluation by a psychiatrist
or other mental health specialist who has been trained in diagnosis (e.g., clinical psychologist, psychiatric nurse).


Identifying risk factors for poor PMH

Social determinants and other factors are linked to increased risks for poor mental health. It may be useful to include
questions to identify experience of violence, substance use, poverty, poor social support and other risk factors
during consultations with women.





16 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


3.4 Treatment


The aim of psychological interventions without pharmacological treatment

is to reduce or manage a person’s mental health condition. There is growing
evidence of a positive impact of psychological interventions for women
attending MCH services _(38, 39)_ . In the past, psychological interventions were
provided only by mental health specialists in many sessions. Now, many
other service providers, including general health-care providers, community
health workers and even peer educators, are being trained to deliver these
interventions (under the supervision of a mental health specialist) in a few
sessions. The WHO mhGAP intervention guide _(2)_ and related training and
operation manuals provide detailed information on the delivery of mental
health care in non-specialist settings.





All women with a suspected or diagnosed mental health condition should receive psychoeducation, information
on ways to reduce stress and strengthen social support and encouragement to take part in daily activities that will
support their mental well-being. Interventions targeting their specific mental health conditions should be provided
within MCH services, where possible, or externally through referrals, as appropriate.


Conditions with mild symptoms

Brief psychological interventions for women in the perinatal period with suspected common mental health
conditions such as depression or anxiety can be provided by trained MCH service providers. WHO has published
manuals on use of the following evidence-based interventions:

Thinking Healthy _(40)_ (perinatal depression)
Problem Management Plus (PM+) _(29)_ (depression, anxiety and stress)
Group Interpersonal Therapy _(41)_ (depression)
Self-Help Plus (SP+) _(30)_ (stress)


Conditions with moderate-to-severe symptoms

Severe mental health conditions include psychosis, bipolar disorder, suicidality and severe depression and are
characterized by disordered thinking and behaviour. Women with moderate-to-severe mental health conditions
have several symptoms of mental ill health that significantly affect their ability to engage in daily activities (including
care of their infant), most of the time, on most days, for at least 2 weeks.


These conditions usually require more intensive interventions that are delivered or supervised by mental health
specialists. Evidence-based interventions that may be provided if the resources are available are listed in Table 1.


**Table 1. Evidence-based interventions for treatment of mental health conditions**















3. Provision of care 17


**Table 1.** _continued_

















Medication

Most women who experience mental health conditions can be helped with

a combination of psychosocial support and psychological interventions.
Prescription of psychotropic medicine may, however, be necessary for
women with moderate-to-severe symptoms of mental illness, women who
are not helped by psychological interventions (or if these are not available)
and women with a diagnosis of bipolar disorder, schizophrenia or another
form of psychosis.


18 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services




Additional information on the provision of mental health care is provided in several publications:


**Topic** **Organization (country)** **Title and description** **Reference no.**







































3. Provision of care 19


#### 4. Integration of programmes















22


4.1 Planning


A plan to integrate mental health care during the perinatal period into MCH services should include:



Referrals to other
services that can
offer additional
support



Screening of all
women for PMH
conditions



Identification of
women who would
benefit from mental
health support



In developing a plan, the following should be considered.


Forming a core working team

_**Identify leaders**_
First, the people who will lead planning and integration of mental health care into MCH services should be
identified. The core working team will be responsible for overseeing integration of PMH care and should ensure
that stakeholders are consulted throughout the process.


There may already be a core working team. If not, you should try to include the following:


**Potential core working team members and additional stakeholders**

women who have experienced pregnancy and caregiving
families
women with experience of (perinatal) mental health conditions
health service managers in government, the district and the facility
health information and medical records staff
financial managers
MCH service providers (e.g., doctors, nurses, midwives, community health workers, social workers)
mental health workers, trainers and supervisors
community leaders
traditional and faith practitioners
representatives of NGOs, civil society and advocacy groups that support women and children
academics and researchers
international agencies
donors


_**Set expectations**_
Teams should be given clear responsibilities and should show mutual respect and good communication. Annex 1
provides sample terms of reference for a working team to guide PMH service integration.


4. Integration of programmes 23


Conducting a situation analysis

_**Collect contextual data**_
Before developing a plan, it is important to collect and analyse

information about the culture, context, existing policies, systems,
resources, local needs and barriers to care and also the demand and
need for PMH care and what exists already to meet the demand.
Situation analyses are dynamic and continuous. They ensure that the
interventions are tailored to the local context, are consistent with
government guidelines, build on available resources and meet the
identified needs. This kind of planning ensures community engagement
and sustainability. Partnerships with universities and NGOs can be useful
in conducting such resource-intensive research.





_**Speak with relevant stakeholders**_
The core working team should identify and engage stakeholders at the start of planning, and stakeholders should
be consulted throughout planning, preparation, provision and evaluation of mental health services. They may
contribute their expertise in mental health, local and national contexts and health care systems to guide the process
and address issues.


The group of stakeholders will depend on the setting. They will be called upon to give input throughout integration,
in group meetings or individual consultations, depending on the situation. Information about the current provision
of PMH care and the local context can be collected from stakeholders during interviews, by direct observation, in
focus group discussions and at informal meetings.


The core working team could distribute the tasks among themselves or collaborate with researchers for the situation
analysis. It may be helpful to set timelines and a means for ensuring that tasks are completed.


An example of a mental health situation analysis is given on p. 76 of the mhGAP operations manual _(3)_ .





24 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


Conducting a needs assessment

The situation analysis provides the initial information necessary to prepare a budget for integration of mental
health care into MCH services. Next, the mental health care needs and resources necessary to provide care should
be reviewed. The following questions should be considered:


**What is the need for PMH services?**
This can be determined from data on the prevalence of maternal mental health conditions in the country or

region. Choose the best available data. If local or national data are not available, epidemiological data from
similar settings may be used and adjusted, where necessary, in discussion with local experts.


**What is the expected annual number of women who will require PMH care in MCH services?**
This can be determined by discussion with MCH service managers, researchers and other local experts. The

number should include mental health promotion interventions for all women as well as treatment for those
with mild and moderate mental health symptoms.


Developing a plan and a budget

Once the targets are agreed upon, a plan and budget to achieve them can be developed by considering the following
questions:


**What services are to be provided?**
Fig. 5 proposes interventions based on service type and available resources.


**How feasible will it be for MCH service providers to add the desired interventions to their routine tasks?**


**What resources are necessary to provide mental health care to women attending MCH services**

**during the perinatal period?**
The resources may include:

   - health-care service providers

   - time for training, supervision, support, attending staff meetings, intervention delivery for health-care

service providers

   - private spaces for providing care

   - transport (for health-care service providers and women)

   - psychotropic medication

   - referral pathways

The desired interventions will determine the types of service providers and resources required for delivery.

If additional service providers or resources are not available, the interventions chosen may depend on
the abilities and available time of those already employed and existing resources. Consider the use of
volunteers or peer providers.


4. Integration of programmes 25


**What resources are currently available in MCH services that could be used to provide the**

**interventions? What are the costs associated with those resources?**
A sample budget template is shown in Annex 2.


**What is the estimated cost of any additional resources required?**
The costs of existing resources and services may be used to determine this amount.


**What budget is available for integration?**
The mental health care that can be provided will be determined by the available budget and the

interventions to be delivered.


**Fig. 5. Perinatal mental health care interventions according to needs and resources**





Treatment for mental health conditions with mild symptoms
Referral for mental health care
Detection of mental health conditions


Life skills
Stress management
Promotion of functioning
Strengthening social support
Support groups: antenatal > postnatal > parenting
Detection of risk factors


Psychoeducation


Respectful care



Setting targets

In discussions with local stakeholders, service gaps can be prioritized for

short- (within 3 years) and medium-term (3–5 years) targets. The criteria
that can be used to select priorities include: the estimated number of
women experiencing mental health conditions, what stakeholders
consider the most important conditions to be addressed, the severity
of conditions, the potential impact of existing interventions to improve
mental health outcomes and the cost of intervention. These can be
tested during monitoring and evaluation of integration.


The targets should be aligned with local and national mental health and
MCH plans, policies and targets.


Additional information is provided in several publications:





**Topic** **Organization / author** **Title and description** **Reference no.**















26 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


4.2 Preparing for implementation


Once the core working team and stakeholders have established the PMH needs and collected the relevant data for
planning integration of PMH into MCH services, they should prepare to deliver the service. Careful preparation will
ensure that the strategies for delivery are suitable for the setting and that the MCH service providers are adequately
trained and supported.


Adaptation for context and culture

The care already provided in MCH services and the beliefs, values, attitudes and behaviour of MCH service providers,
women attending MCH services and their partners and family members are important considerations in integrating
PMH care. The success of integration will depend on the willingness of these stakeholders to implement, take part in
and support integration. A situation analysis will help to understand existing services and stakeholder perspectives;
however, further collaboration with stakeholders is necessary to adapt the interventions and delivery strategies to
the local context and cultures _(57)_ .


Mental health and MCH policies and legislation may differ widely by country. Those relevant to mental health and
human rights should be considered.


Local cultural practices affect how and when women can access MCH services. For example, in settings where women
are expected to spend a specified time in their homes after childbirth, community health workers would ideally
provide initial mental health support. Considerations such as who makes decisions in households and women’s rights
to personal safety, autonomy and economic empowerment also influence women’s access to services. Stigmatization
of mental health conditions may delay or prevent women from seeking help.


Workforce

Dedicated PMH service providers assure the continuity of care and case



management, resulting in less loss to follow-up and better coordination
of care. Many issues can affect the staffing and effectiveness of services,
including recruitment, skills, training, capacity-building and the wellbeing of service providers and should be considered by health-care
managers and planners.


_**Recruitment**_
In many settings, it may be difficult to recruit skilled service providers

to train, supervise and deliver PMH care, as few individuals may have
knowledge and skills in mental health. Furthermore, limited additional
funding for the integration of PMH may make it difficult to hire additional
service providers. In these situations, task-sharing can be effective, in
which specific tasks are delegated to increase the care _(58)_ . For example,
health promotion, psychoeducation and screening can be provided by
trained peer workers or community health workers. In task-shifting, it
is important to work closely with service providers to determine the
feasibility and acceptability of any new responsibilities.


_**Training**_
The requirements for training are determined by:







the PMH interventions chosen;
the skills and competence of the selected providers;
the availability of service providers to provide the different levels of stepped care; and
whether MCH service providers have received any training in mental health before introduction of the PMH

service.


This will ensure that training is relevant and appropriate, built on existing knowledge and skills. Training may be
provided alone or as part of other MCH training. Training will help health workers not only in assessing and managing
women’s mental health conditions but also in increasing their overall skill in providing care.


4. Integration of programmes 27


_**Competence**_
Successful implementation requires the core working team and stakeholders to acknowledge the challenges of
identifying, developing, and assessing core competencies of the selected providers _(59)_ . In-service training should
be competence-based and provide the required competence in terms of knowledge, skills and attitudes.


In addition to basic knowledge about PMH, training should include learning and practice appropriate to allocated
tasks (e.g., detection of PMH conditions, psychosocial support, psychological interventions, prescribing, making
referrals, monitoring), knowledge of other relevant services and MCH service provider attitudes towards mental
health conditions. Ideally, PMH training should be part of pre-service education.


Effective training approaches allow trainees to feel comfortable in asking questions and discussing freely. Participatory
learning, which combines lectures, case studies, group work, role-play and problem-solving, can make training
enjoyable. Drawing on MCH service providers’ experiences may improve the effectiveness of training. Standardized
role plays may serve as an assessment tool to regularly evaluate competencies of the trained workforce _(60)_ .


The content of the training should be adapted to the local context and culture and reflect local experience.


_**Cascade training**_
Training may be scaled up in a cascade training approach _(61)_, in which a mental health specialist (i.e., master trainer)
trains health professionals, who then train community health workers or peer providers. In this approach, trainers
must have the knowledge and skills to deliver training and to teach others how to train. Use or adaptation of training
manuals linked to local and national policies, legislation and guidelines will help ensure quality.


Opportunities should be provided for continuous in-service learning after training. This can include case reviews
from the MCH service, refresher training to address gaps in knowledge and skills, on-the-job mentoring, supervision
and support.


_**Training resources**_
Reading materials, tools (e.g., protocols, standard operating procedures, posters, pocket cards) or online resources
to support training may be used to supplement face-to-face training. This also ensures access to information long
after training has been completed. Links to any national remote training platforms, such as telehealth, can be useful.





28 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


_**Clinical supervision**_
Clinical supervision provides an opportunity for service providers to discuss challenging cases, ideas about
doing things differently and any emotional stress they might have experienced in delivering PMH care. Clinical
supervision to ensure the provision of high-quality mental health care comprises both mentoring and supportive
supervision. Both support service providers and build capacity. Supervision should ideally be provided by a mental
health specialist or trainer but can also be provided by peers or non-specialist service providers (e.g., obstetricians,
gynaecologists, nurses, midwives and community health workers) with experience in mental health. Where there are
few mental health specialists, a cascade model may be used for supervision. In this model, a qualified, experienced
supervisor provides supervision to one or several less experienced supervisors, who, in turn, supervise service
providers, either individually or in groups.


_**Mentoring supervision**_
Mentoring supervision involves a mentor, who is an MCH provider with a higher level of professional training
(e.g., obstetrician, gynaecologist, psychiatrist, midwife), who supports a “mentee”, who has a lower level of training
(e.g., nurse, community health worker) in a clinical setting. The relationship enhances individual practice through:

review of PMH cases and constructive feedback on improving practice;
guided reflection on personal attitudes, beliefs and behaviour that may maintain stereotypes and

stigmatization associated with mental health conditions; and
support to prevent distress or exhaustion in the mentee and encourage self-care.


_**Supportive supervision**_
Supportive supervision involves a manager (i.e., supervisor) who is accountable for the care provided by a group of
MCH providers (i.e., supervisees). The manager supports providers to improve their clinical practice continuously.
Supervision should be conducted regularly, with open, two-way communication that is respectful and nonauthoritarian. It may be used to improve providers’ knowledge and skills, improve team work, conduct case
management reviews and assess performance against team goals.


_**MCH provider self-care**_
MCH providers have stressful jobs, and their work often brings a heavy emotional burden. Self-care is an important
part of maintaining a healthy work–life balance and increases resilience to work stressors. Being conscious of one’s
mental, physical and emotional well-being means taking time to care for oneself. Those who provide psychological
therapy or counselling need to talk about and share their experiences in a safe space. They cannot continue to listen
to and help other people if they are not cared for themselves. MCH providers may also have stressors in their own
lives. They must address their own emotional health to ensure that they can care well for the women they serve.


Coordination of care

Provision of PMH care often requires links with other relevant services. For example, a woman who experiences
depression during pregnancy may be supported by a midwife; however, she will continue to require care and support
after the birth of her baby, which may be provided by a community health worker who also provides antenatal and
newborn care. In certain settings, additional care from social, employment, community, legal and other mental
health services, community-based organizations, faith-based organizations and traditional and faith healers may
be available to provide further support.


Successful integration of PMH care into MCH services requires effective coordination to ensure that women receive
the care they need at the appropriate time. This includes establishing clear pathways of care for women attending
MCH services who require mental health care, case management and referral to higher-level mental health services
and other relevant formal and informal services.


4. Integration of programmes 29


_**Care pathways**_
A clear step-by-step guide for care pathways should be developed to assist MCH service providers in decisionmaking. This would include criteria and guidance for making referrals to local higher-level mental health services,
social support and community organizations (Fig. 6). These resources should have been identified in the situation
analysis during planning.


**Fig. 6. Examples of local providers for the coordination of care and support**



Gender-based violence

services



Substance use disorder

programmes



Specialist mental

health services



Poverty alleviation

programmes Faith-based groups


**child health services**


Housing services Social services



support groups



When developing a care pathway, consider the following:

Points of entry for women to access services. These may include primary care facilities, hospitals, maternity

units and child health clinics. They may also include non-health organizations such as NGOs, women’s and
parents’ groups and faith-based groups.
A stepped-care approach to services based on mental health promotion and prevention for all women

attending MCH services, brief treatment for those with mild symptoms and referral to more care for those
with moderate-to-severe symptoms
Roles of MCH service providers in providing mental health care (Table 2)
Systems to monitor referral and back-referrals for case management
A user-friendly directory of resources, which should be updated regularly and provide as much detail as

possible, such as hours of opening and names and contact details of providers. The resources need not
be formal organizations; community groups and associations, effective peer educators and other informal
sources of support are all important resources.


30 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


**Table 2. Examples of MCH provider roles in a care pathway**


**MCH providers** **Role**









Intersectoral coordination of care and support can avoid duplication of

services and ensure more comprehensive support for women in the
perinatal period. It is important to engage with relevant local providers
when setting up the service to foster shared ownership of and
commitment to the care pathway. Later, regular interaction in formal
meetings (to discuss implementation) and informal gatherings (to
celebrate successes) can help to maintain collaborative relationships
and clear communication channels. It may be helpful to set agreements
or standard operating procedures with collaborating organizations to
define roles, align pathways and identify roles and responsibilities.





_**Referral**_
Referral is an essential part of PMH care. A referral system should be set up before identifying women with mental
health conditions and should be linked to the care pathway. If this is not done, expectations for help may not be
met, and women’s trust may be broken, which will have a negative impact on their future use of services and their
health outcomes.


An effective referral system provides links to all levels of the health system and mechanisms for referral to and from
supporting services outside the health sector. Case managers and providers should receive training in the criteria
for making a referral to specific services in the local pathway of care.


_**Case management**_
It is often difficult for women experiencing PMH conditions to make the best use of the available care and support.
Case management consists of coordinating care and support on behalf of women attending MCH services (Fig. 7).
In MCH services, cases may be managed by various service providers (e.g., midwife, associate clinician, associate
nurse, nurse, non-specialist doctor, mental health specialist) if they have received the appropriate training. They
should also have regular supervision and support.


4. Integration of programmes 31


**Fig. 7. Case management**



























Additional information on workforce and coordination of care is provided in several publications:


**Topic** **Organization (country)** **Title and description** **Reference no.**

































32 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


#### Provision of care for specific needs


#### 5. Providing care for special needs

Some women are more vulnerable to mental health conditions during the perinatal period. Service providers should
be aware of their needs, how to support them in MCH services and where to refer them for additional care. Women
who have additional needs during pregnancy are likely to experience greater stigmatization and may struggle to
engage with services for various reasons. It is critical that PMH services are respectful and inclusive for all women.
Situational analyses and needs assessments can be used to identify whether there is a high proportion of women
in the context with specific needs and to design appropriate services for them with the available resources. Each
section below gives a brief description of the characteristic, the associated additional needs and resources that
could be used in different situations.


5.1 History of mental health problems


Women who become pregnant may have a history of or a current mental health condition, which may or may not
have been diagnosed and treated. These women are at increased risk that their mental health symptoms will worsen
during the perinatal period. It is important to identify women with a history of mental health problems because of
the possible impact on both the women and their babies.





Additional information on service delivery is provided in several publications:


**Resource type** **Organization (country)** **Title** **Reference no.**















34


5.2 Substance use


Alcohol and drug use during the perinatal period can compromise the health and social lives of women and their
infants. Women may use substances to deal with symptoms of mental ill health or difficult life circumstances.
Substance use can affect their ability to function as a parent, decrease the likelihood of their accessing services
and increase their risk of experiencing gender-based violence (GBV). As substance use during pregnancy is highly
stigmatized, women are unlikely to disclose their use to service providers.





Additional information on the identification and management of substance use and substance use disorders in
pregnancy is provided below:


**Resource type** **Organization** **Title** **Reference no.**







5.3 Self-harm or thoughts of suicide


Suicide is a leading cause of death among women. Depression is a major risk for suicide, and up to 20% of women
with PMH conditions experience suicidal thoughts or self-harm _(34)_ . The risk is higher among adolescents. Thoughts
and behaviour related to suicide include thoughts about suicide, planning suicide, and taking action to end one’s life.


Suicidal thoughts do not always lead to plans to end one’s life, although most suicides follow some warning signs.
Some people have suicidal thoughts or behaviour without a previous mental health condition.











Additional information on suicide and self-harm in the perinatal period is provided in several publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country)** **Title** **Reference no.**









5. Providing care for special needs 35


5.4 Disability and physical illness


Women with a physical illness or disability may experience particular challenges and concerns about pregnancy,
birth and parenting, which can cause greater stress and affect their mental health. Such women are also at a higher
risk of stigmatization because of their health condition, which may worsen during the perinatal period. Health-care
providers should ensure that services are accessible and inclusive for all women. These women must be able to make
informed choices during their MCH care and feel that they have a say in their care.





Additional information on PMH and disability and physical illness in the perinatal period is provided in publications
listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization** **Title** **Reference no.**









5.5 HIV/AIDS


Many women living with HIV learn of their status for the first time during pregnancy. The stress of living with HIV,
including stigmatization and financial concerns, makes women vulnerable to depression and anxiety. Mental health
conditions can also have a negative impact on the progression of HIV/AIDS, because, if they are not treated, they
may result in poorer adherence to HIV treatment, missing routine MCH appointments and an increased risk of HIVrelated maternal death.





Additional information on PMH and HIV/AIDS in the perinatal period is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country)** **Title** **Reference no.**









36 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


5.6 Adolescent pregnancy


Adolescents (aged 10–19) who become pregnant may face challenges such as stigmatization and difficulty in
completing school and finding employment while caring for their children. They are particularly vulnerable to physical
or sexual abuse. Pregnant adolescents are at greater risk of mental health conditions, particularly depression, than
adolescents who are not pregnant and pregnant adults.





Additional information on PMH and adolescent pregnancy is provided below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country)** **Title** **Reference no.**









5.7 Unintended pregnancy and termination


Unexpected or unintentional pregnancy may have consequences for the mental health of both women and their
children. Women who have no choice but to continue an unwanted pregnancy may experience poor mental
health, while termination of a pregnancy should be handled sensitively but may also have negative mental health
consequences for women.











Additional information on PMH and unintended pregnancy and termination is provided below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country) / Author** **Title** **Reference no.**









5. Providing care for special needs 37


5.8 Infant loss


When women lose their infants through termination, miscarriage, stillbirth or neonatal death, they and their partners
need emotional support. Women may have various emotional reactions to the loss of a pregnancy or baby, including
experience shock, guilt, anger and sadness. Many women do not know how to tell their family members and friends
and may require support in doing so.





Additional information on PMH and infant loss is provided in this publication:


**Resource type** **Author** **Title** **Reference no.**

Good practice guide Geller PA et al. Psychological and medical aspects of pregnancy loss _89_


5.9 Premature birth, infant ill-health


Carers of infants who are born prematurely or with poor health are usually stressed and worried. The infants may
have to spend a long time in intensive care, which may limit bonding with their mothers and make breastfeeding
more difficult.





Additional information on PMH and premature birth and infant ill-health is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Author** **Title** **Reference no.**









38 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


5.10 Difficulty in bonding


A close, intimate relationship or “bonding” between a woman and her infant is very important for the infant’s
emotional and physical development. Some women may find difficulty in forming an emotional attachment to
their infants, because the pregnancy was unwanted or due to negative childhood experiences, domestic violence
or mental health conditions. Women with severe mental health conditions may feel unable or unsure of how to tend
to their infants. If women do not bond with their infant, this can impact their responsiveness to the infant’s needs
and whether they are able to breastfeed.













Additional information on PMH and parent-infant bonding and attachment is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country)** **Title** **Reference no.**















5.11 Domestic and gender-based violence


Domestic and gender-based violence (GBV) during pregnancy puts women, infants and others in the household in
danger. The perinatal period may trigger violence and exacerbate existing abuse because of changes or strains that
pregnancy or a new infant can create for a family. Violence increases the risks for miscarriage, infection, premature
birth and injury or death of the baby. It can contribute directly to emotional and mental health problems in the
woman, such as depression, anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder, which can affect the development of the
baby. Women who are experiencing domestic violence may feel vulnerable and alone but not want to report the
abuse for a number of reasons. They may feel guilty or ashamed, believing that the abuse is their fault. They may
be afraid that the abuse will worsen or that they might be killed if their abuser knows they have told anyone. They
may not even realize that they are being abused or may feel that the abuse is normal. Domestic violence can also
impact infants, through child abuse and neglect.


5. Providing care for special needs 39


Additional information on PMH and domestic and gender-based violence is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country)** **Title** **Reference no.**











5.12 Poverty


Women living in poverty lack the financial resources to maintain basic living standards such as ensuring food and
housing. They have fewer educational and employment opportunities, are exposed to unhealthy living environments
and are less able to access high-quality health care. These stressful living conditions place them at higher risk of
mental health conditions such as anxiety, depression and suicidal ideation and behaviour. There is a circular relation
between mental health conditions and poverty: Poverty increases the risk of mental health conditions, and mental
health conditions may increase the risk of poverty.











Additional information on PMH and poverty is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country)** **Title** **Reference no.**









5.13 Humanitarian settings


In emergencies, people may experience grief, acute stress reactions, harmful use of alcohol and drugs, depression,
anxiety and post-traumatic stress disorder. Mental health may deteriorate due to:

inability to meet basic needs; housing, food, medical care, safety;
vulnerability to GBV, torture and rape;
poverty and discrimination of marginalized groups;
loss of loved ones and social support systems;
lack of information about the humanitarian response, e.g., provision of food and how to obtain basic services;
pre-existing mental health conditions.


40 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


Additional information on PMH in humanitarian settings is provided in this publication:


**Resource type** **Organization** **Title** **Reference no.**

Manual WHO mhGAP Humanitarian intervention guide _100_





5.14 Pandemics


Pandemics such as COVID-19 place stress on women in the perinatal period and their families, with a large increased
risk for maternal depression and anxiety. The risk for GBV and intimate partner violence is also increased. As service
providers may be redeployed during a pandemic, fewer face-to-face contacts may be possible.

As families spend more time in close contact, the risk of relationship stress is increased, which may cause

anxiety and lead to abuse.
Family finances may deteriorate. Abusive partners may restrict access to money, health services and social

support.
Women experience increased social isolation and restrictions on movement, which can lead to loneliness.

This may be increased by controlling, abusive partners.
There may be less access to health-care services for women, such as abuse hotlines, shelters and crisis

centres.


5. Providing care for special needs 41


Additional information on PMH during pandemics is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country) / Author** **Title and description** **Reference no.**



















5.15 Social isolation


Women with supportive partners, families and social networks are better able to cope with the stresses of parenthood.
Feeling socially isolated may worsen women’s mental health if they feel unable to cope with stresses in their lives.
Women may feel isolated even when they live close to many other people. Women with mental health conditions
during the perinatal period may also experience social isolation due to stigmatization of their condition. Some
women may choose to isolate themselves if they fear judgement or feel discriminated against.















Additional information on PMH and social isolation is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization (country) / Author** **Title and description** **Reference no.**











42 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


#### Monitoring and evaluation


#### 6. Monitoring and evaluation



















44


Information on the provision of PMH care within MCH services will help
the core working team to understand what is going well and what should
be improved through continuous quality control. Monitoring consists of
regular, planned collection of information to assess the progress of PMH
integration into MCH services over time. Routine monitoring helps to ensure
that challenges are identified early so that larger problems can be avoided.
For evaluation, specific information is assessed at certain times to determine
whether the intended results have been achieved.





Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) may focus on determining how well care is being delivered, its availability in the
setting, the impact of the care on women’s mental well-being and demand for and satisfaction with mental health
care among women during the perinatal period. The desired impact, outcome or output is called an “indicator”.
Examples of indicators are provided in Annex 3.



M&E for mental health care should build on and be integrated into local MCH
services. Mental health indicators should be included in the local services
plan for M&E.


M&E should also include ways for women and MCH service providers to
provide feedback on PMH care. The reports may be confidential, such as
for reporting complaints, violations of rights or positive experiences of care
(e.g., helpline, ombudsperson, feedback box). Routine service follow-up, such
as exit interviews with women in the perinatal period, could be planned as
part of the intervention.





Some service providers may design and conduct a study to evaluate the service or part of the service. Health facilities
or programmes may be able to attract researchers from NGOs or educational institutions to conduct external
evaluations of the services, which may be quantitative or qualitative. An objective view from an external party of
how the service is running can be helpful.


Ensure that you engage stakeholders, so that everyone can agree on the indicators and how data will be collected
and used. Plan joint meetings (every 6–12 months) to present and review data with the core planning team, MCH
service providers and other stakeholders to strengthen collaboration and partnerships. Smaller, monthly meetings
to review monitoring processes and data can be held in MCH services.


Considerations in developing an M&E plan for PMH:


Integrate the plan into existing M&E processes.
Identify the desired impact or outcome of the care provided with stakeholders (including women who

might use the service).
Ensure that the information collected will indicate whether the desired impact or outcome has been

achieved.
Ensure that the necessary information can be collected easily and reported accurately.
Collect information by various methods (e.g., surveys, written responses, interviews, focus groups).
Collect information from a variety of people (e.g., women who use the service and MCH service providers).
Include confidential ways to collect feedback on the service from women and service providers.
Clearly describe how the information collected will be analysed.
Collaborate with researchers to design and implement the M&E plan.


6. Monitoring and evaluation 45


Additional information on M&E is provided in publications listed below:


**Resource type** **Organization** **Title** **Reference no.**





46 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


#### References

1. [The mhGAP community toolkit: field test version. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2019 (https://www.who.](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/the-mhgap-community-toolkit-field-test-version)
[int/publications/i/item/the-mhgap-community-toolkit-field-test-version, accessed 27 July 2022).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/the-mhgap-community-toolkit-field-test-version)


2. mhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and substance use disorders in non-specialized health
settings: mental health Gap Action Programme (mhGAP) version 2.0. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016
[(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/250239, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/250239)


3. [mhGAP operations manual. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/ha](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/275386/9789241514811-eng.pdf)
[ndle/10665/275386/9789241514811-eng.pdf, accessed 25 July 2022).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/275386/9789241514811-eng.pdf)


4. WHO recommendations on maternal and newborn care for a positive postnatal experience. Geneva, World
[Health Organization, 2022 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35467813).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/35467813)


5. [Improving early childhood development: WHO guideline. Geneva, World Health Organization; 2020 (https://](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32200595)
[www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32200595).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/32200595)


6. Guidance on community mental health services: Promoting person-centred and rights-based approaches.
[Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240025707, accessed](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240025707)
27 July 2022).


7. Dennis CL, Falah-Hassani K, Shiri R. Prevalence of antenatal and postnatal anxiety: systematic review and
meta-analysis. Br J Psychiatry. 2017;210(5):315–23.


8. Woody CA, Ferrari AJ, Siskind DJ, Whiteford HA, Harris MG. A systematic review and meta-regression of the
prevalence and incidence of perinatal depression. J Affect Disord. 2017;219:86–92.


9. Gavin NI, Gaynes BN, Lohr KN, Meltzer-Brody S, Gartlehner G, Swinson T. Perinatal depression: A systematic
review of prevalence and incidence. Obstet Gynecol. 2005;106(5 Pt 1):1071–83.


10. Gelaye B, Rondon MB, Araya R, Williams MA. Epidemiology of maternal depression, risk factors, and child
outcomes in low-income and middle-income countries. Lancet Psychiatry. 2016;3(10):973–82.


11. Field T, Diego M, Hernandez-Reif M. Prenatal depression effects and interventions: A review. Infant Behav Dev.
2010;33(4):409–18.


12. Howard LM, Khalifeh H. Perinatal mental health: A review of progress and challenges. World Psychiatry.
2020;19(3):313–27.


13. Alder J, Fink N, Bitzer J, Hösli I, Holzgreve W. Depression and anxiety during pregnancy: A risk factor for obstetric,
fetal and neonatal outcome? A critical review of the literature. J Matern Fetal Neonatal Med. 2007;20(3):189–209.


14. Lasater ME, Beebe M, Gresh A, Blomberg K, Warren N. Addressing the unmet need for maternal mental health
services in low- and middle-income countries: Integrating mental health into maternal health care. J Midwifery
Womens Health. 2017;62(6):657–60.


15. Barker ED, Copeland W, Maughan B, Jaffee SR, Uher R. Relative impact of maternal depression and associated
risk factors on offspring psychopathology. Br J Psychiatry. 2012;200(2):124–9.


16. [Social determinants of mental health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (https://apps.who.int/iris/](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/112828)
[handle/10665/112828).](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/112828)


17. Maternal mental health and child health and development in low and middle income countries. Geneva: World
[Health Organization; 2008 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/43975/9789241597142_eng.pdf).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/43975/9789241597142_eng.pdf)


18. [Mental health: Strengthening our response. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018 (https://www.who.int/](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-strengthening-our-response)
[news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-strengthening-our-response, accessed 28 July 2022)](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/mental-health-strengthening-our-response)


19. Ho FYY, Yeung WF, Ng THY, Chan CS. The efficacy and cost–effectiveness of stepped care prevention and
treatment for depressive and/or anxiety disorders: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Sci Rep. 2016;6:29281.



47


20. Coo S, Garcia MI, Awad N, Rowe H, Fisher J. Cultural adaptation of an intervention to prevent postnatal
depression and anxiety in Chilean new mothers. J Reprod Infant Psychol. 2021;39(3):276–87.


21. Araya R, Alvarado R, Sepülveda R, Rojas G. Lessons from scaling up a depression treatment program in primary
care in Chile. Rev Panam Salud Publ. 2012;32(3):234–40.


22. Corrigan PW, Watson AC. Understanding the impact of stigma on people with mental illness. World Psychiatry.
2002;1(1):16–20.


23. Sambrook Smith M, Lawrence V, Sadler E, Easter A. Barriers to accessing mental health services for women
with perinatal mental illness: Systematic review and meta-synthesis of qualitative studies in the UK. BMJ Open.
2019;9(1):e024803.


24. Afulani PA, Phillips B, Aborigo RA, Moyer CA. Person-centred maternity care in low-income and middle-income
countries: Analysis of data from Kenya, Ghana, and India. Lancet Glob Health. 2019;7(1):e96–109.


25. Kendig S, Keats JP, Hoffman MC, Kay LB, Miller ES, Moore Simas TA et al. Consensus bundle on maternal mental
health: Perinatal depression and anxiety. Obstet Gynecol. 2017;129(3):422–30.


26. Ng’oma M, Bitew T, Kalyo-Utete M, Hanlon C, Honikman S. Perinatal mental health around the world: Priorities
for research and service development in Africa. B J Psychiatry Int. 2020;17(3):56–9.


27. Compton MT, Shim RS. Mental illness prevention and mental health promotion: When, who, and how. Psychiatr
Serv. 2020;71(9):981–3.


28. Park S, Kim J, Oh J, Ahn S. Effects of psychoeducation on the mental health and relationships of pregnant
couples: A systemic review and meta-analysis. Int J Nurs Stud. 2020;104:103439.


29. Problem management plus (PM+): Individual psychological help for adults impaired by distress in communities
[exposed to adversity. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2016 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MSD-MER-16.2)
[WHO-MSD-MER-16.2, accessed 27 July 2022).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MSD-MER-16.2)


30. Self help plus (SH+). A group-based stress management course for adults. Geneva: World Health Organization;
[2021 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240035119, accessed 27 July 2022).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240035119)


31. [Doing what matters in times of stress: An illustrated guide. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331901/9789240003910-geo.pdf)
[apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331901/9789240003910-geo.pdf, accessed 27 July 2022).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/331901/9789240003910-geo.pdf)


32. Edward K, Castle D, Mills C, Davis L, Casey J. An integrative review of paternal depression. Am J Mens Health.
2015;9(1):26–34.


33. Ali GC, Ryan G, De Silva MJ. Validated screening tools for common mental disorders in low and middle income
countries: a systematic review. PLoS One. 2016;11(6):e0156939.


34. Howard LM, Ryan EG, Trevillion K, Anderson F, Bick D, Bye A et al. Accuracy of the Whooley questions and the
Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale in identifying depression and other mental disorders in early pregnancy.
Br J Psychiatry. 2018;212(1):50–6.


35. Subba P, Luitel NP, Kohrt BA, Jordans MJD. Improving detection of mental health problems in community
settings in Nepal: Development and pilot testing of the community informant detection tool. Confl Health.
2017;11:28.


36. Brenman NF, Luitel NP, Mall S, Jordans MJD. Demand and access to mental health services: A qualitative
formative study in Nepal. BMC Int Health Hum Rights. 2014;14:22.


37. Jordans MJD, Kohrt BA, Luitel NP, Komproe IH, Lund C. Accuracy of proactive case finding for mental disorders
by community informants in Nepal. Br J Psychiatry. 2015;207(6):501–6.


38. Singla DR, Kohrt BA, Murray LK, Anand A, Chorpita B, Patel V. Psychological treatments for the world: Lessons
from low- and middle-income countries. Annu Rev Clin Psychol. 2017;13:149–81.


39. Abbass-Dick J, Brown HK, Jackson KT, Rempel L, Dennis CL. Perinatal breastfeeding interventions including
fathers/partners: A systematic review of the literature. Midwifery. 2019;75:41–51.


40. Thinking healthy – A manual for psychological management of perinatal depression. Geneva: World Health
[Organization; 2015 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MSD-MER-15.1, accessed 27 July 2022).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-MSD-MER-15.1)


48 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


41. [Group interpersonal therapy (IPT) for depression. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250219/WHO-MSD-MER-16.4-eng.pdf)
[int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250219/WHO-MSD-MER-16.4-eng.pdf).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250219/WHO-MSD-MER-16.4-eng.pdf)


42. Rahman A. Challenges and opportunities in developing a psychological intervention for perinatal depression
in rural Pakistan – A multi-method study. Arch Womens Ment Health. 2007;10(5):211–9.


43. [Mental well-being: Resources for the public. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022 (https://www.who.int/](https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/mental-well-being-resources-for-the-public)
[news-room/feature-stories/mental-well-being-resources-for-the-public, accessed 27 July 2022).](https://www.who.int/news-room/feature-stories/mental-well-being-resources-for-the-public)


44. Guidelines on mental health promotive and preventive interventions for adolescents: Helping adolescents
[thrive. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33301276).](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/33301276)


45. [Emotional wellness self-help tool. Los Angeles (CA): Maternal Mental Health Care NOW; 2022 (https://mycare.](https://mycare.mmhnow.org/index.html)
[mmhnow.org/index.html).](https://mycare.mmhnow.org/index.html)


46. For moms, dads & families. Perinatal Mental Health Project. Capetown: University of Capetown, Alan J. Fisher
[Centre for Public Mental Health; 2022 (https://pmhp.za.org/resources/parents-families/).](https://pmhp.za.org/resources/parents-families/)


47. Management plus (group PM+): Group psychological help for adults impaired by distress in communities
[exposed to adversity. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/hand](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/334055/9789240008106-eng.pdf)
[le/10665/334055/9789240008106-eng.pdf).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/334055/9789240008106-eng.pdf)


48. [WHO Model Lists of Essential Medicines. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/](https://www.who.int/groups/expert-committee-on-selection-and-use-of-essential-medicines/essential-medicines-lists)
[groups/expert-committee-on-selection-and-use-of-essential-medicines/essential-medicines-lists, accessed](https://www.who.int/groups/expert-committee-on-selection-and-use-of-essential-medicines/essential-medicines-lists)
27 July 2022)


49. Drugs and lactation database (LactMed). Bethesda (MD): National Library of Medicine;


50. [Basic psychosocial skills: A guide for COVID-19 responders. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2020 (https://](https://www.who.int/news/item/01-06-2020-basic-psychosocial-skills-a-guide-for-covid-19-responders)
[www.who.int/news/item/01-06-2020-basic-psychosocial-skills-a-guide-for-covid-19-responders, accessed 27](https://www.who.int/news/item/01-06-2020-basic-psychosocial-skills-a-guide-for-covid-19-responders)
July 2022).


51. Taylor Salisbury T, Atmore KH, Nhambongo I, Mintade M, Massinga L, Spencer J et al. Integrating humancentred design into the development of an intervention to improve the mental wellbeing of young women
in the perinatal period: the Catalyst project. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth. 2021;21(1):183.


52. [Needs assessment toolbox. Geneva: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; 2022 (http://](http://needsassessment.unhcr.org/)
[needsassessment.unhcr.org/, accessed 27 July 2022).](http://needsassessment.unhcr.org/)


53. Inter-Agency Standing Committee. Recommendations for conducting ethical mental health and psychosocial
[research in emergency settings. Geneva: International Organization for Migration; 2014 (https://publications.](https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/iasc_mental_health_2014.pdf)
[iom.int/system/files/pdf/iasc_mental_health_2014.pdf).](https://publications.iom.int/system/files/pdf/iasc_mental_health_2014.pdf)


54. World Health Organization (2016). Global strategy on human resources for health: workforce 2030. WHO.
[Geneva, Switzerland. https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250368/9789241511131-eng.pdf](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250368/9789241511131-eng.pdf)
(accessed 16 August 2022).


55. World Health Organization, World Bank Group, United Nations Children’s Fund. Nurturing care handbook.
[Nurturing care for early childhood development. Geneva: World Health Organization; undated (https://](https://nurturing-care.org/handbook/)
[nurturing-care.org/handbook/, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://nurturing-care.org/handbook/)


56. Kuruvilla S, Hinton R, Boerma T, Bunney R, Casammitjana N, Cortez R et al. Business not as usual: How
multisectoral collaboration can promote transformative change for health and sustainable development. BMJ.
2018;363:k4771 (doi: 10.1136/bmj.k4771).


57. Rathod S, Gega L, Degnan A, Pikard J, Khan T, Husain N et al. The current status of culturally adapted mental
health interventions: A practice-focused review of meta-analyses. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2018;14:165–78.


58. Purgato M, Uphoff E, Singh R, Thapa Pachya A, Abdulmalik J, van Ginneken N. Promotion, prevention and
treatment interventions for mental health in low- and middle-income countries through a task-shifting
approach. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci. 2020;29:e150.


59. Collins PY, Musisi S, Frehwot S, Patel V. The core competencies for mental, neurological, and substance use
disorder care in sub-Saharan Africa. Glob Health Action. 2015;8(1):26682 (doi: 10.3402/gha.v8.26682).


References 49


60. Ottman KE, Kohrt BA, Pedersen GA, Schafer A. Use of role plays to assess therapist competency and its
association with client outcomes in psychological interventions: A scoping review and competency research
agenda. Behav Res Ther. 2020;130:103531 (doi: 10.1016/j.brat.2019.103531).


61. Jacobs RL. Institutionalizing organizational change through cascade training. J Eur Ind Training. 2002;26(2–
4):177–82.


62. Makanjuola V, Doku V, Jenkins R, Gureje O. Impact of a one-week intensive “training of trainers” workshop for
community health workers in south-west Nigeria. Ment Health Fam Med. 2012;9(1):33–8.


63. Task sharing to improve access to family planning/contraception: summary brief. family planning/contraception.
[Geneva: World Health Organization; 2018 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-RHR-17.20).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/WHO-RHR-17.20)


64. Guidelines for human resources planning in environmental and occupational health. Geneva: World Health
Organization; 1998 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/guidelines-for-human-resources-planning-inenvironmental-and-occupational-health, accessed 27 July 2022).


65. Global strategy on human resources for health: Workforce 2030. Geneva: World HealthOrganization;2016
[(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250368/9789241511131-eng.pdf, accessed 17 August 2022).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/250368/9789241511131-eng.pdf)


66. Bhutta Z, Lassi ZS, Pariyo GW, Hulcho L. Global experience of community health workers for delivery of health
related Millennium Development Goals: A systematic review, country case studies, and recommendations for
[integration into national health systems. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010 (https://hrhresourcecenter.](https://hrhresourcecenter.org/node/3204.html)
[org/node/3204.html).](https://hrhresourcecenter.org/node/3204.html)


67. Increasing access to health workers in remote and rural areas through improved retention. Global policy
[recommendations. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2010 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/increasing-access-to-health-workers-in-remote-and-rural-areas-through-improved-retention)
[increasing-access-to-health-workers-in-remote-and-rural-areas-through-improved-retention).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/increasing-access-to-health-workers-in-remote-and-rural-areas-through-improved-retention)


68. World Health Organization, United Nations Children’s Fund. EQUIP: Ensuring quality in psychological support.
[Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022 (https://www.who.int/teams/mental-health-and-substance-use/](https://www.who.int/teams/mental-health-and-substance-use/treatment-care/equip-ensuring-quality-in-psychological-support)
[treatment-care/equip-ensuring-quality-in-psychological-support, accessed 27 July 2022)](https://www.who.int/teams/mental-health-and-substance-use/treatment-care/equip-ensuring-quality-in-psychological-support)


69. mhGAP training manuals for the mhGAP intervention guide for mental, neurological and substance use
[disorders in non-specialized health settings. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017 (https://apps.who.int/](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/259161/WHO-MSD-MER-17.6-eng.pdf)
[iris/bitstream/handle/10665/259161/WHO-MSD-MER-17.6-eng.pdf, accessed 27 July 2022)](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/259161/WHO-MSD-MER-17.6-eng.pdf)


70. PMHP empathic engagement skills [video]. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project, CaringforMothers.
[2018 (https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=w9260fFtgMo&feature=youtu.be&ab_](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=w9260fFtgMo&feature=youtu.be&ab_channel=PMHPatUCTCaringforMothers)
[channel=PMHPatUCTCaringforMothers, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://www.youtube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=w9260fFtgMo&feature=youtu.be&ab_channel=PMHPatUCTCaringforMothers)


71. Maternal mental health. A guide for health and social workers. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project;
[undated (https://bettercare.co.za/learning-programmes/maternal-mental-health/).](https://bettercare.co.za/learning-programmes/maternal-mental-health/)


72. [Take care. Self-care strategies for health workers. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project; 2022 (https://](https://pmhp.za.org/resources/for-service-providers/)
[pmhp.za.org/resources/for-service-providers/).](https://pmhp.za.org/resources/for-service-providers/)


73. WHO guideline on self-care interventions for health and well-being, 2022 revision. Geneva: World Health
[Organization; 2022 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240052192).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240052192)


74. Cantwell R, Mahmood T. Management of women with mental health issues during pregnancy and the
[postnatal period. London: Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, 2011 (https://www.rcog.org.uk/](https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/managementwomenmentalhealthgoodpractice14.pdf)
[globalassets/documents/guidelines/managementwomenmentalhealthgoodpractice14.pdf)](https://www.rcog.org.uk/globalassets/documents/guidelines/managementwomenmentalhealthgoodpractice14.pdf)


75. Perinatal mental health fact sheets for health professionals. Flemington (VIC): Centre of Perinatal Excellence;
[2022 (https://www.cope.org.au/health-professionals/perinatal-mental-health-factsheets-for-professionals/,](https://www.cope.org.au/health-professionals/perinatal-mental-health-factsheets-for-professionals/)
accessed 26 July 2022).


76. Antenatal fact sheets for women and their families. Flemington (VIC): Centre of Perinatal Excellence; 2022
[(https://www.cope.org.au/expecting-a-baby/mental-health-conditions-pregnancy/antenatal-mental-health-](https://www.cope.org.au/expecting-a-baby/mental-health-conditions-pregnancy/antenatal-mental-health-factsheets-resources/)
[factsheets-resources/, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://www.cope.org.au/expecting-a-baby/mental-health-conditions-pregnancy/antenatal-mental-health-factsheets-resources/)


77. Guidelines for the identification and management of substance use and substance use disorders in pregnancy.
[Geneva: World Health Organization; 2015 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241548731, accessed](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241548731)
25 July 2022).


50 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


78. [Suicide. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022 https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide,](https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/suicide)
accessed 21 August 2022).


79. [Suicidal ideation during the perinatal period. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project; undated (https://](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/Suicide_during_pregnancy.pdf)
[pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/Suicide_during_pregnancy.pdf)](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/Suicide_during_pregnancy.pdf)


80. Austin MP, Highet N, Expert Working Group. Mental health care in the perinatal period: Australian clinical
[practice guideline. Melbourne (VIC): Centre of Perinatal Excellence; 2017 (https://www.cope.org.au/wp-](https://www.cope.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/COPE_AssessingSuicideRisk-1.pdf)
[content/uploads/2019/07/COPE_AssessingSuicideRisk-1.pdf).](https://www.cope.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/COPE_AssessingSuicideRisk-1.pdf)


81. Toolkit on disability for Africa – inclusive health services for persons with disabilities. New York City (NY):
[United Nations; 2016 (https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/disability/Toolkit/Inclusive-Health.pdf).](https://www.un.org/esa/socdev/documents/disability/Toolkit/Inclusive-Health.pdf)


82. [Disability and health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2021 (https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-](https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/disability-and-health)
[sheets/detail/disability-and-health, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/disability-and-health)


83. [HIV & maternal mental illness. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project; undated (https://pmhp.za.org/wp-](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/HIV_maternal_mental_illness.pdf)
[content/uploads/HIV_maternal_mental_illness.pdf)](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/HIV_maternal_mental_illness.pdf)


84. Integration of mental health and HIV interventions: Key considerations. Geneva: World Health Organization;
[2022 (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240043176).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240043176)


85. [Adolescent pregnancy and mental illness. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project; undated (https://pmhp.](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/Adolescent_pregnancy.pdf)
[za.org/wp-content/uploads/Adolescent_pregnancy.pdf).](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/Adolescent_pregnancy.pdf)


86. A teen’s guide to pregnancy giving birth and life as a mom. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project; 2019
[(https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/WCG_TeenPregnancy.pdf)](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/WCG_TeenPregnancy.pdf)


87. Horvath S, Schreiber CA. Unintended pregnancy, induced abortion, and mental health. Curr Psychiatry Rep.
2017;19(11):77 (doi: 10.1007/s11920-017-0832-4).


88. [Global abortion policies database. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022 (https://abortion-policies.srhr.](https://abortion-policies.srhr.org/)
[org/, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://abortion-policies.srhr.org/)


89. Geller P, Woodland M, Daetwyler C. Psychological and medical aspects of pregnancy loss. MedEdPORTAL.2015;11(1)
(doi: 10.15766/mep_2374-8265.10240).


90. Anderson C, Cacola P. Implications of preterm birth for maternal mental health and infant development. Am
J Matern Child Nurs. 2017;42(2):108–14 (doi: 10.1097/NMC.0000000000000311).


91. Vigod SN, Villegas L, Dennis CL, Ross LE. Prevalence and risk factors for postpartum depression among women
with preterm and low-birth-weight infants: A systematic review. BJOG. 2010;117(5):540–50 (doi: 10.1111/j.14710528.2009.02493.x).


92. Lambrenos K, Weindling AM, Calam R, Cox AD. The effect of a child’s disability on mother’s mental health. Arch
Dis Childh. 1996;74(2):115–20 (doi: 10.1136/adc.74.2.115).


93. Assessing mother–infant interaction and safety of the woman and infant. A guide for health professionals.
[Flemington (VIC): Centre of Perinatal Excellence; 2018 (https://www.cope.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/](https://www.cope.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Assessing-Mother-infant-Interaction.pdf)
[Assessing-Mother-infant-Interaction.pdf, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://www.cope.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2018/07/Assessing-Mother-infant-Interaction.pdf)


94. The bond with your baby #EarlyMomentsMatter. New York City (NY): United Nations Children’s Fund; 2020
[(https://www.unicef.org/parenting/child-care/bond-with-your-baby, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://www.unicef.org/parenting/child-care/bond-with-your-baby)


95. [Bonding and attachment: newborns. Raisingchildren.net.au; 2020 [website]. (https://raisingchildren.net.au/](https://raisingchildren.net.au/newborns/connecting-communicating/bonding/bonding-newborns)
[newborns/connecting-communicating/bonding/bonding-newborns, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://raisingchildren.net.au/newborns/connecting-communicating/bonding/bonding-newborns)


96. Intimate partner violence during pregnancy: Information sheet. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2011
[(https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/70764/?sequence=1, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/70764/?sequence=1)


97. van Heyningen T, Hatcher AM, Woollett N, Marais A, Field S, Honikman S. Addressing violence against women
in maternity care: A guide for health workers in maternity care. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project;
[2021 (https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/PMHP_GBV-perinatal-period_guide_final.pdf, accessed 26](https://pmhp.za.org/wp-content/uploads/PMHP_GBV-perinatal-period_guide_final.pdf)
July 2022).


References 51


98. World mental health report: Transforming mental health for all. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022
[https://apps.who.int/iris/rest/bitstreams/1433523/retrieve, accessed 17 August 2022).](https://apps.who.int/iris/rest/bitstreams/1433523/retrieve)


99. 6. Special social issues in maternal mental health. In: Bettercare Learning Programmes / Maternal Mental Health.
Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project; undated (https://bettercare.co.za/learn/maternal-mental-health/
text/06.html#poverty-and-mental-illness, accessed 26 July 2022)


100. mhGAP humanitarian intervention guide (mhGAP-HIG) training of health-care providers: Training manual. Geneva:

[World Health Organization; 2015 (https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/352581/9789240045361-](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/352581/9789240045361-eng.pdf?sequence=1)
[eng.pdf?sequence=1, accessed 26 July 2022).](https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/352581/9789240045361-eng.pdf?sequence=1)


101. Mukherjee TI, Khan AG, Dasgupta A, Samari G. Reproductive justice in the time of COVID-19: A systematic

review of the indirect impacts of COVID-19 on sexual and reproductive health. Reprod Health. 2021;18(1):252
(doi: 10.1186/s12978-021-01286-6).


102. Papworth R, Harris A, Durcan G, Wilton J, Sinclair C. Maternal mental health during a pandemic: A rapid

[evidence review of Covid-19’s impact. London: Centre for Mental Health; 2021 (http://www.infocoponline.es/](http://www.infocoponline.es/pdf/CentreforMH_MaternalMHPandemic_FullReport_0.pdf)
[pdf/CentreforMH_MaternalMHPandemic_FullReport_0.pdf, accessed 26 July 2022).](http://www.infocoponline.es/pdf/CentreforMH_MaternalMHPandemic_FullReport_0.pdf)


103. Roesch A, Amin A, Gupta J, García-Moreno C. Violence againt women during covid-19 pandemic restrictions.

BMJ. 2020;369:m1712 (doi: 10.1136/bmj.m1712).


104. Mental health and psychosocial considerations during the COVID-19 outbreak. Geneva: World Health

[Organization; 2020 (https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331490?locale-attribute=ar&locale-, accessed](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/331490?locale-attribute=ar&locale-)
26 July 2022).


105. Understanding the effects of social isolation on mental health. New Orleans (LA): Tulane University; 2020

[(https://publichealth.tulane.edu/blog/effects-of-social-isolation-on-mental-health/, accessed 25 July 2022).](https://publichealth.tulane.edu/blog/effects-of-social-isolation-on-mental-health/)


106. Lever Taylor B, Howard LM, Jackson K, Johnson S, Mantovani N, Nath S et al. Mums alone: Exploring the role of

isolation and loneliness in the narratives of women diagnosed with perinatal depression. J Clinical Med Res.
2021;10(11)2271 (doi: 10.3390/jcm10112271).


[107. Messages for mothers in response to COVID-19. Capetown: Perinatal Mental Health Project; 2022 (https://](https://pmhp.za.org/)

[pmhp.za.org/).](https://pmhp.za.org/)


108. Fuhr DC, Calvert C, Ronsmans C, Chandra PS, Sikander S, De Silva MJ et al. Contribution of suicide and injuries

to pregnancy-related mortality in low and middle-income countries: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
Lancet Psychiatry. 2014;1(3):213–25.


109. Baron E, Field S, Kafaar Z, Honikman S. Patterns of use of a maternal mental health service in a low-resource

antenatal setting in South Africa. Health Soc Care Community. 2015;23(5):502–12.


110. World Health Organization, US Agency for International Development, University of Oslo. Health

[facility & community data toolkit. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2014 (https://apps.who.int/iris/](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329458)
[handle/10665/329458, accessed 25 July 2022)](https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/329458)


111. SCORE for health data technical package: Global report on health data systems and capacity. Geneva: World

[Health Organization; 2020. (https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240018709, accessed 25 July 2022).](https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240018709)


52 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


##### ANNEX 1
#### Sample terms of reference for a working team

1. Purpose

1.1 The working team leads the planning and implementation of integration of perinatal mental health

(PMH) care into maternal and child health services. It oversees progress in planning and implementation
milestones and deliverables. It acts as the decision-making body.


2. Terms of reference

2.1 To advocate for and champion integration of PMH into existing maternal and child services
2.2 To support development of action plans, policies and protocols to integrate PMH into maternal and child

services
2.3 To support development of monitoring systems to collect data on PMH
2.4 To support resource mobilization for services and allocate human, financial and technical resources.
2.5 To develop a training plan to build capacity to respond to PMH
2.6 To facilitate multi-sectoral coordination and collaboration with other services and organizations
2.7 To report to senior management on the performance of the programme in addressing PMH


3. Membership

3.1 Chair: (Name)
3.2 Members: (Names)


4. Decisions

4.1 (Insert details of how decision will be made by the group)


5. Meetings

5.1 (Insert details of the frequency, location, hosts and dates of meetings)


6. Communications

6.1 (Insert details of the format and anticipated frequency of communication between meetings)



53


##### ANNEX 2
#### Sample template for a budget

Development of a budget requires estimates of the costs of providing services and identification of sources of funds
to cover those costs.


The template below gives examples of the items that should be considered in budgeting (see Table A1.1).


**Table A1.1. Sample template for a budget**





54


##### ANNEX 3
#### Examples of indicators for monitoring and evaluation

The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan should have indicators to measure progress towards achieving objectives.
The table below provides examples of outputs, the indicators of achievement of the output and the source used to
verify the indicator. Each service should select the indicators that are important or measurable in the local setting.
Measurements may be quantitative (how many) and qualitative (how well).


**Table A1.2. Examples of M&E plan**


**Output** **Indicator** **Source**

Situational analysis - Situational analysis conducted - Situational analysis report



Standard operating procedure for
maternal mental health service
components

Enhanced provision of mental
health care in MCH services


Mental health promotion and
awareness raising




- No. of standard operating procedures developed and implemented - Standard operating procedure


- No. of facilities and community programmes that provide mental health care - Service use records from

- Proportion of clients with mental health conditions identified and treated health information systems

                                           - Attendance registers




- No. of people reached by awareness-raising activities

- No. of awareness-raising activities held

- No. of psycho-educational materials distributed

- Proportion of clients reached by awareness-raising activities

- Client satisfaction with awareness-raising activities



Screening and detection - No. of clients who booked at the facility and followed the programme

                   - No. of clients who were offered screening

                    - No. of clients screened

                    - Screening coverage (no. of clients screened / no. of clients attending)

                  - Numbers and proportions of clients who:

                   - refused screening

                     - qualified for referral

                    - refused referral

                    - were referred to other services

Social support - No. of new clients attending social support service

                  - No. of appointments booked

                  - No. of appointments attended

                  - No. of appointments rescheduled

                  - No. of follow-up appointments missed

                    - No. of clients referred to additional services

                  - Proportion of clients who reported decreased symptoms and improved
functioning because of the service

                   - Client satisfaction with the social support provided

Psychological intervention - No. of new clients attending a psychological intervention

                  - No. of appointments booked

                  - No. of appointments attended (may be broken down by type of appointment:
full, half, face-to-face; digital)

                  - No. of appointments rescheduled

                  - No. of follow-up appointments missed

                    - No. of clients referred to additional services

                  - Proportion of clients who reported decreased symptoms and improved
functioning because of the service

                   - Client satisfaction with the psychological intervention provided




- Community survey on change
in knowledge and attitudes

- Activity reports

- Satisfaction survey, client
feedback

- Observation by supervisors

- Facility data

- Service screening log

- Observation by supervisors of
how well screening is being
conducted


- Social support provider
records

- Satisfaction survey, client
feedback

- Supervisor’s review of case
management


- Counsellor’s diary

- Client evaluation records, data
on repeat screening

- Satisfaction survey, client
feedback

- Supervisor’s review of case
management



55


**Table A1.2.** _continued_


**Output** **Indicator** **Source**













_Source:_ Programme reporting standards for sexual, reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2017 (WHO/MCA/17.11).


56 Guide for integration of perinatal mental health in maternal and child health services


For more information


Department of Mental Health and Substance Use
World Health Organization
Avenue Appia 20
1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland


[www.who.int](https://www.who.int/)


